# What has been done during the last two weeks?

@arnenator has continued reading. There is still a lot left to read, but he is make steady progress. Looking at the video's about SSDs and FDP made a lot of sense in terms of looking at the actual implementation. For that reason @arnenator is currently spending more than half of his time reading and then looking at the implementation of FDP into `CacheLib` created by Meta. All notes describing the implementation can be found in `docs/fdp/cachelib-fdp-impl.md`. It is still ongoing. 
@arnenator only has two papers, provided by Pinar, and 1 blog post that he found himself at the DuckDB website left. After that he will shift all of his focus on to the implementation details of FDP and further study how to implement FDP support into DuckDB. Not to mention, trying to actually code a small example of how to use FDP that we can use.

@emiloh has looked at `fio` and described how and what to look at when doing an experiment. That is also documented in `docs/fdp/fio.md`. This needs to be revised in collaboration with Pinar to determine which metrics would be the most interesting to look at, or if we should simply try them all to see which metrics that have the most impact.

@emiloh has tried to create a reproducible instance to DuckDB, which we can use to play around with and use for testing/researching. This approach seems rather difficult given no experience with CMake. The things that he have tried (without succes): 

1. Add duckdb headers to `CMakeLists.txt`, use it with target include statements
2. Add duckdb as an external project to test project defined in`CMakeLists.txt`.
3. Trying to compile directly with `g++` and including the header through the `-I` and `-L` respectively.

The different approaches have yet to indicate some succes. However, he personally thinks that is a matter of experience, and there is something in the linking process that does not is simply not correct, i.e the ordering of statements etc.

@emiloh read blog posts about memory management in DuckDB and will most likely read the two papers given to us about sorting and aggreation (and larger-than-memory workloads)

## Questions for supervision

> **Questions by @arnenator**
> - I would like to have a better understanding of the internals of an SSD and how the operating system collaborates with the device. Do you have some specific material that you can recommend that I should take a look at?
> - Does it sound like a reasonable plan for me to shift my attention to fully study these two systems and later in collaboration with @emiloh create a small sample app that communicates with the SSD using FDP via `io_uring`?

# Meeting Notes

It would be interesting to look into latency when using the SSD. Specifically the spikes that the older SSDs produce in latency. 



# Actions
